[docs] variable fonts are supported in the Fonts guide (#48777)
expo/expo: docs/pages/develop/user-interface/fonts.mdx

### Variable fonts

> A variable font holds many faces in one file. Instead of shipping one file per weight, you ship one file and select a face with the `fontWeight` and `fontStyle` style props. Both the [config plugin](#with-expo-font-config-plugin) and the [`useFonts` hook](#with-usefonts-hook) accept them.

Reviewer: ✏️ **style** `prose.md#core-principles`

"them" lands on the `fontWeight` and `fontStyle` style props, which the config plugin does not take, so name variable fonts instead.

```suggestion
A variable font holds many faces in one file. Instead of shipping one file per weight, you ship one file and select a face with the `fontWeight` and `fontStyle` style props. Both the [config plugin](#with-expo-font-config-plugin) and the [`useFonts` hook](#with-usefonts-hook) accept variable fonts.
```

<!-- docs-review -->

> **info** Android and iOS support variable fonts in SDK 58 and later. On earlier versions, use static font files.

Each platform decides which faces a file offers in a different way, so check the file before you rely on it:

> - **Android** reads the `wght` axis and draws each weight `fontWeight` can name from it, limited to the range the axis declares. This needs Android 10 or newer. On earlier versions the font renders at its default weight, and Android creates the bold by thickening the letters.

Reviewer: ✏️ **style** `mechanics.md#sdk-version-ranges`

"Android 10 or newer" states a version range, so use "later", which is what the callout above already does with "SDK 58 and later".

```suggestion
- **Android** reads the `wght` axis and draws each weight `fontWeight` can name from it, limited to the range the axis declares. This needs Android 10 or later. On earlier versions the font renders at its default weight, and Android creates the bold by thickening the letters.
```

<!-- docs-review -->

> - **iOS** reads the _named instances_ the file declares. A named instance is a face the font designer gave a name and a fixed position on each axis, such as "Bold" or "Condensed Light". React Native selects the named instance whose weight is closest to the one you request, so a weight with no named instance is a weight you cannot select. If the file declares no named instances, only its default face renders.

Reviewer: ✏️ **style** `prose.md#core-principles`

"React Native selects the named instance whose weight is closest to the one you request, so a weight with no named instance is a weight you cannot select" carries two ideas across 28 words. Split it after "request".

```suggestion
- **iOS** reads the _named instances_ the file declares. A named instance is a face the font designer gave a name and a fixed position on each axis, such as "Bold" or "Condensed Light". React Native selects the named instance whose weight is closest to the one you request. A weight that no named instance covers is out of reach. If the file declares no named instances, only its default face renders.
```

<!-- docs-review -->

> For `fontStyle: 'italic'`, Android applies the font's `ital` axis on Android 15 and newer. On earlier versions, Android creates the italic by slanting the upright letters. iOS uses the italic named instances in the file.

Reviewer: ✏️ **style** `mechanics.md#sdk-version-ranges`

Same here: "Android 15 and newer" states a version range, so use "later".

```suggestion
For `fontStyle: 'italic'`, Android applies the font's `ital` axis on Android 15 and later. On earlier versions, Android creates the italic by slanting the upright letters. iOS uses the italic named instances in the file.
```

<!-- docs-review -->

> Inspect a file's axes and named instances with a utility such as [fontTools](https://fonttools.readthedocs.io/). If a face you need is out of reach on a platform, use fontTools to extract that axis configuration and save it as a separate static font file.

Reviewer: 💡 **nit** `links-and-headings.md#link-text`

The "extract that axis configuration" step lost the link the previous text carried, so point it at `varLib.instancer`, which fontTools now recommends over the `varLib.mutator` page this page linked before.

```suggestion
Inspect a file's axes and named instances with a utility such as [fontTools](https://fonttools.readthedocs.io/). If a face you need is out of reach on a platform, use fontTools to [extract that axis configuration](https://fonttools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/varLib/instancer.html) and save it as a separate static font file.
```

<!-- docs-review -->

If you want to refer to fonts using a combination of `fontFamily`, `weight`, and `style`, provide an array of objects (see `Inter` below).

> For a [variable font](#variable-fonts) on Android, declare the file path once inside each fontDefinition entry, or next to `fontFamily` (to reduce duplication). Each definition needs a `weight` and `style` pair that no other definition in the same family uses, because Android resolves a family by that pair.

Reviewer: ✏️ **style** `mechanics.md#inline-code-is-for-code`

"fontDefinition" is a config property, so it needs backticks and the plural spelling the example uses: `fontDefinitions`.

---

✏️ **style** `prose.md#core-principles`

"declare the file path once inside each fontDefinition entry, or next to `fontFamily`" contradicts itself, because "once" belongs to the second option. Move it there.

```suggestion
For a [variable font](#variable-fonts) on Android, declare the file path in each `fontDefinitions` entry, or once next to `fontFamily` to avoid repeating it. Each definition needs a `weight` and `style` pair that no other definition in the same family uses, because Android resolves a family by that pair.
```

<!-- docs-review -->

}
```

`style` selects the face that `fontStyle` matches, but it does not slant the glyphs. To get an italic out of an upright file, set a slant axis in `axes`, such as `slnt` or `ital`.

> `axes` accepts any [variation axis](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/typography/opentype/spec/dvaraxisreg) the font declares, such as `wdth` for a condensed face. Tags are four characters and case sensitive: the registered axes (`ital`, `opsz`, `slnt`, `wdth`, `wght`) are lowercase, and a font's own axes are uppercase, such as `GRAD`. `weight` sets `wght` unless you override it in `axes`.

Reviewer: ✏️ **style** `prose.md#core-principles`

The colon joins two separate facts into one 27-word sentence, so end it after "case sensitive" and start a new one. "four characters" also reads better as "four characters long".

```suggestion
`axes` accepts any [variation axis](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/typography/opentype/spec/dvaraxisreg) the font declares, such as `wdth` for a condensed face. Tags are four characters long and case sensitive. The registered axes (`ital`, `opsz`, `slnt`, `wdth`, `wght`) are lowercase, and a font's own axes are uppercase, such as `GRAD`. `weight` sets `wght` unless you override it in `axes`.
```

<!-- docs-review -->

> On iOS, `path` and `axes` do not apply. List the variable font file in `ios.fonts` as you would a static font, and the faces available are the [named instances](#variable-fonts) in it.

Reviewer: ✏️ **style** `prose.md#sentence-construction`

The "and" joins an instruction to a statement of fact, so split it into two sentences.

```suggestion
On iOS, `path` and `axes` do not apply. List the variable font file in `ios.fonts` as you would a static font. The faces you can select are the [named instances](#variable-fonts) the file declares.
```

<!-- docs-review -->

<Text style={{ fontFamily: 'Inter-Black' }}>Inter Black</Text>
```

If the file you mapped is a [variable font](#variable-fonts), select a face with the `fontWeight` and `fontStyle` style props:

```tsx

> <Text style={{ fontFamily: 'RobotoFlex-variable', fontWeight: '300' }}>Light</Text>

Reviewer: ⚠️ **correctness** `prose.md#core-principles`

Step 2 maps only `Inter-Black`, so `RobotoFlex-variable` arrives here with nothing on the page defining it, and it does not match the `Roboto Flex` family the config plugin example uses. Add a variable font to the `useFonts` map in step 2, or reuse a name the page already maps.

<!-- docs-review -->
